Because we've been fully integrated. And I said,
alert several of those truck units, and let's get
the MP company there that furnishes an escort and
convoy control. And I said, we want to start
rolling trucks out of that depot by 10 o'clock
tonight. This was then about 3.30, 4 o'clock. And I
said, I'm on my way back, and I will ride down with
the first convoy and with the first contingent and
check it in. And so they said, OK, we're on our way.
So they went to work. And by the time I got there,
they were already loading the vehicles. And we
actually shipped that first evening. We shipped
60. 10-ton trailer loads full. So that was about
600 tons. It was about 10 tons in those 10-ton
trailer loads. And all the ingredients to bake
bread. So... Did you get it down there by midnight?
Oh, hell yeah. We got it there by... We started
leaving the depot about 9 o'clock, 9.30. And I went
down, we went down in a contingent of... Oh, I think
10 trucks, 10 truck units. And with each 10 truck
unit, we had one extra tractor go along in case a
tractor broke down. And we had a wrecker with each
two units. In other words, we had three wreckers
for the six units, six 10 truck units. And one, six
extra tractors. to cover, but nothing broke down,
no flat tires, no nothing, it was just perfect. We
rolled through the gates, we drove up to the gate,
but we were pretty close to Ryan Main. We called on
our radio and asked them to send an MP Jeep out to
guide us through the proper gate they wanted us to
go through. And they did. We were still out on the
Autobahn on the call. They did. And we went through
their first gate with our first trucks about a
quarter of 11 at night. And the last one came
through the gate a little before midnight. We put
over 600 tons in LeMay. Was he there? Was LeMay? He
was there about 1.30. And I was still there. I
stayed there all night. But about 1.30, he drove
in, and he was driving around, and he saw all these
goddamn, of course, they'd already started
loading aircraft. Sure. Trucks. And they'd drive
the trailer right up to the aircraft. And they had
DPs loading the airplanes down there. We used
thousands of DPs in Europe then. And he said, my
God, where did you get all this stuff? I says,
General LeMay, this is not a drop in the bucket of
what we got available to. just a little bit. Well
anyway, for the first few days, most of the stuff
that was sent in to Berlin was for support of the
U.S. military contingent. And then gradually the
airlift started carrying civilian supplies and
things like this. because it had to, because we
flew in all the necessities for life in West
Berlin. And as it developed, it developed very
shortly that the biggest tonnage problem of the
airlift would be coal, black hard coal. And to
figure out how to get it into Berlin, was really a
major logistic problem. And LeMay, the old bomber
pilot and bomber commander that he is, he had idea
to take B-17s and put coal in sacks in B-17, in the
bomb bays of B-17s, then fly over an area, there was
a big area near Tegel, T-E-G-L, Tegel, or later
another airport was built in Berlin to handle some
of the traffic out of Tegel, and then take some of
the load off of Tempelhof, but to fly over this big
open space near Tegel, open the bomb bays and drop
this coal and then push it up and scoop it up with
bulldozers and front-end loaders. And they tried
a few of it, but it just didn't work very well. So
they finally decided that they asked me one day to
find out how many duffel bags there were in the
stock throughout Europe. And we came up with a
figure, oh, about five million.
And they said, well, we'll send some of them up to
the Ruhr so they can play around with them at those
coal mines in the Ruhr on whether they can fill them
readily and then load them in rail cars and ship
them down to the airfield. And we'll ship the stuff
in duffel bags and then it can be unloaded easily
and so forth. And that's how it was. And we found out
that a duffel bag would make about 30 round trips
before it wore out and became threadbare. And it
worked out perfectly because a loaded duffel bag
of soft coal or anthracite would weigh about
120 pounds, I think. And a DP could handle it, and
they could swing them up
trucks in Berlin and then they dumped it out and
shipped the empty bags back. And they very soon
decided, very soon found out that airplanes that
carried coal should stay in that service because
they very quickly became saturated with coal dust
on the inside. And after maybe a hundred trips with
coal they would send those aircraft back to a depot
in England where they'd be thoroughly cleaned out
and all the coal dust cleaned out. I made a couple of
trips up to Berlin in a coal plane. And I was up to
Berlin during the lift many, many times. But it was
the airlift during the period it operated That's
going to be hard for you to envision, but averaged
about 10,000 tons a day. I know. I've read the
statistics on that. It's incredible. The
biggest, of course, the Germans would just hang
around those airfields and look at those planes
flying and look at them coming in in bad weather, my
God, in fog. Sometime you could only, you could
barely see the front of your car. Lift planes were
taking off and landing and of course that's where
we perfected GCA, Ground Control Approach, with
radar. It was during the Berlin hair lift. And it
was really, I think, America's finest hour to the
rest of the world for them to see
with a peacetime effort to thwart a quasi wartime
move that an adversary was making. And it gained
for us, I think, a tremendous, a lot of respect from
the Germans and from other people in Europe. to see
the effort that was made and there were about 50
some odd lives lost, American lives lost. Most of
the lives that were lost were accidents caused by
planes flying into the tails of other aircraft in
the corridor, yeah. It was so tight in the corridor
that if a pilot missed his approach into Tempelhof
or to Tegel, and he missed and had to go around, he
could not immediately go around and land again. He
had to go back into the return corridor, almost to a
point near the city of Fulda, so they could work him
back in to the corridor to Berlin. You'd have to go
back quite a few miles back in the return corridor.
Now when you went to Berlin, tell me, what were the
people like during the airlift? The Germans? The
German people? They were amazed at the effort that
American forces were doing to make the city
survive.
They were very cooperative, very receptive, and
most appreciative, I think, of the effort that was
being made. Was there a lot of goodwill in West
Germany at this time? Oh, yes, an awful lot. And I
know, of course, they all wanted to get as close as
they could and see the operations. But they
wouldn't let the civilians come on board. The US
military would let them end up in the British zone
other air base in the British zone that we flew some
coal from. We let German newspaper people and
stuff like that come in and see. How close did you
work with the British and the French on this? Very
close. Very close. Yeah, I made several trips up to
the British command up in the British zone. But on
Easter Day they invited the US invited, and opened
the air bases for the German civilians to come in
and see the operations. And they call it the famous
Easter parade, the airlift.
And as luck would have it, I guess, it was a
beautiful day, a beautiful Sunday. The weather
was just beautiful. It was warm. And every
aircraft that could fly was flying. And that day, I
think, the famous Easter parade tonnage, I think
it was 12,700 or something like that tons flown
that day. And at Rhine, Maine, they estimated that
about 700,000 German civilians crowded as close
as they would let them in on that airfield to watch
the airplanes coming. There was an airplane in
that corridor every three minutes. Every three
minutes behind one another. Tell me about Curtis
LeMay. What kind of person was he? He was a, he was a,
I never worked for him, but of course I worked
around him. He was a, he was a real great guy and a
very, a very dedicated guy. and a real grassroots
American patriot, I guess you would say. And LeMay
is, you know, is about like Patton.
I think guys like that probably are ordained or
born to exist at the time they did exist. I really
think Patton, I believe, Patton believed that he
had been reincarnated, and I really believe he
had. I think he did fight with Hannibal like he said
he did in North Africa when he, after the Battle of
Kasserine Pass, he said, I remember right over
this hill, we fought this so-and-so, and sure
enough, he walked over there and he said it was
right there. And the other officers looked at him,
they thought he was crazy. But I think guys like
Patton and LeMay are probably people like that.
But anyway, the Berlin Airlift, I really believe,
was one of America's finest hours. Now, some
people will disagree with that. They will think
that we showed weakness by resorting to the
airlift. I don't really think so. I think we
probably could have maybe made a show of force and
pushed a convoy up there with armored vehicles in
the lead and fought our way into Berlin. But I think
what we did so amazed and so humiliated the
Russians that I think it was a bigger defeat for
them than if we had run over them with tanks. I think
it was one of America's finest hours. It was really
quite an operation. And there's a little side to
the airlift that's never been told. I'll tell you,
and if I'm ever called up about it, I'll deny it. But
early in the airlift, one of the real headaches was
that, how
in the hell are we going to get a little gasoline up
there, and the liquid fuels?
Not only for the military contingent, but for the
civilian population.
The British had a few tanker planes up in their zone
that they had used during World War II. We didn't
have any tanker planes in Europe at that time. So a
few tanker loads using those British tanker
planes were flown up there.
Then I think it was an American civilian
representative, I believe it was Shell Oil,
said that he's pretty sure we could, by using some
of the canals and rivers and so forth in the
northern part of Germany from Hamburg, we could
work our way into Berlin with barges. liquid fuel
and he believes that by bribing the right Russian
officers when we got to the Russian zone we could
get in barge loads of liquid fuel gasoline and
diesel and so forth. He was given the go-ahead to do
that to make those arrangements. Those
arrangements were made and a lot I think most of
was taken in by handing over to some Russian
officers or Russian commanders, gold marks or
gold francs or whatever. Whatever the bribe was
made in, it was made in gold, so I'm told. But a lot
of, most of the liquid fuel, because I know after
the first two or three weeks, there was no more said
about the tanker planes. And every time I went to
Berlin, I knew nothing about it after that. And
every time I went to Berlin, we had plenty of fuel up
there. And I know I made a couple of comments about
it. I said, well, Shell's able to get it up here. And
it's one of those things we didn't talk about. The
same sort of thing happened in Southeast Asia
during the war with rubber.
after the Japs swarmed all over a certain part of
Southeast Asia, the word was put out that for every
little sandpan or every little boatload of rubber
that arrived in Australia, one or two ports in
Australia, so much in gold would be paid. And not a
big tonnage of rubber, but quite a flow of rubber.
crude rubber came into Australia the same way. Did
you leave after the Berlin? After the airlift?
Shortly after that I was transferred back to the
States. Back to Washington? Yeah, back to
Washington.
I didn't come back until 50. Yeah, but it wasn't too
long because the airlift was on about a year. Okay,
it was during this time, during the airlift, that
Truman integrated the Armed Forces. What was your
opinion on that? Well, I thought it was high time
really that they'd be integrated because like
those truck companies up there in Geeson and other
areas and I know I had had some dealings with some
black officers and all of them that I knew were, you
know, very capable and very likable. And there was
one, there was a black chaplain there in Geesen
that my kids just loved and I loved the guy. And I
later, we later ran into him in Japan and we've seen
him several times since then and he was a
wonderful, wonderful guy. So I think Truman made a
very smart move doing that. Was there any
grumbling? Yes, there was quite a bit. But I think
it really was minimal. I think it was done with the
minimum of problems, really. Did you have any
problems at your command? No, none at all. Were
blacks moving into your command then after the
integration order?
Yes.
The quasi-problem I had with integration was in
Japan. When was that? 54, 55,
when I commanded all of the petroleum facilities
in the Western Pacific. Everything in Japan, and I
had operational control over the petroleum and on
Okinawa. And these were mostly facilities that we
had taken over from the Japanese. They were mostly
underground facilities. And this was a joint
operation. We had all the fuel for the Navy and the
Air Force and the Army and everybody out there west
of Hawaii. I had a couple of black officers at some
of my terminals. My command stretched for 1,500
miles. I had terminals on Hokkaido and up in the
north and on Kyushu and way in the southernmost
major island in Japan. I had a couple of black
officers
to a beautiful blonde-headed German girl who was
the daughter of the former mayor of Berlin. He had
married her when he was stationed in Berlin. And he
was assigned to my petroleum storage facility and
depot in Sasebo.
There was a little bit of a problem there. have too
many officers ourselves at that depot of about 15.
But in the Sasebo itself, there was other military
units. And there was a couple of minor incidents at
the club, like dances at the club by this officer.
It was a nice looking guy. Wanted to dance with
other white officers' wives. And of course, other
white guys danced with his wife, his white wife.
So, but nothing real serious. And we had another
case like that at a storage facility near Tokyo.
But those things, they only happened once or
twice. And most of the time, the black officer,
went out of his way not to force himself to dance
with or be put in a position where he would have to
dance with a white officer's wife.
But I think by and large, I think integration in the
services certainly went a lot smoother than it has
in other parts of our economy. in our daily life.
Okay, let's turn to Korea. Of course in 1950 North
Korea invaded South Korea, and America joined in
the U.S. or U.N. force. What role did you have? I had
very little direct role. I made several trips to
Korea, and
During the, I was not there at all during the
fighting. Not at all. We have a, there's an Aggie
who became a flag officer, Ray Murray. Did you
interview him? Where does he live? He's a Marine.
Marine. He's a major general. Ray Murray. He does
not live in Texas though, does he?
That's why I haven't interviewed him. He
commanded the Marine Regiment that fought the
Chinese at the Chosin Reservoir. No kidding. Oh,
yeah. Ray is a... And he was a football player. In
fact, he kept me from lettering one year at the end.
Ray was an in. A heck of a nice guy. Ray Murray. Very,
very distinguished guy. But I...
I saw some service at Pusan and at Inchon after the
Korean fighting. I spent about 60 days at Pusan and
Inchon, but I had very little direct contact in the
Korean operations.
There's one thing that I want to tell you about that
is not written up anywhere in any bibliography of
mine. But I feel very deeply about it. It affected
me. It affected the rank that I was able to achieve.
It kept me from getting another star. I know that
particularly. And if ever anybody
really died for a good cause, I think I did. Right
after I came back from Germany, I was assigned
briefly, and that's about a year, in the
assignment branch for military personnel, for
officers and warrant officers. And during. So you
were chief military personnel for Quartermaster
General? Yeah, yeah. OK. Yeah. For about a year and
a half. This was about 1949? 49, 50. And you were a
full colonel at the time? No, still a lieutenant
colonel. Because I had been demoted prior to the
war. I was still a lieutenant colonel. But it was a
colonel's billet. And I just loved it. My God, I
loved the personnel. And I was there when Korea
broke out and felt it had the responsibility for
the recall of officers to active duty.
deferred and guys wanted compassionate
deferment. I had one officer's wife offered to go
to bed with me if I did not call her husband to duty.
Yeah, a socialite in New York wanted me to meet her
at the New Yorker Hotel and everything to keep him
from coming to duty. And, but the biggest thing,
the thing that I'm most proud of in my whole
military career During the course of this minute
review of a lot of files,
a civilian lady that had been a fixture in military
personnel for 30 years, she was not an old woman
either, she was a single gal, quite a swinger in her
own right, but she came in to me one day and showed me
a file. where there was a major discrepancy in this
officer's file pertaining to his integration
into the regular army. At the time... Was she in the
military herself? No, no. She was a civilian
personnel. Worked in military personnel and had
worked in military personnel all these years.
When the people were integrated, when I was
integrated, and everybody was integrated into
the Army, we had to fill out an exhaustive personal
history statement about all our background, all
our education. And one of the prime
prerequisites, you should have at least two years
of college. The military wanted the applicants to
have at least two years of college. Some guys were
integrated that didn't have two years. I think
nobody was integrated that didn't have any
college experience. So people filled out and they
were, they provided transcripts of their data to
substantiate it and so forth. And a lot of other
personal history and so forth and so on. The FBI and
the CID checked on all of these things and rendered
a report to the Department of the Army on what they
found and so forth. Well, in this discrepancy that
this lady brought in to me one evening and showed to
me, we were in the process of screening some
officers to go to a school, to go to a higher school
like the Command and General Staff College or
something like that. She showed me in his
integration thing where he claimed that he had
graduated from the University of Cincinnati and
that the FBI in their background investigation of
everybody that was integrated reported in just a
very terse statement that the registrar at the
University of Cincinnati said that there was
nothing in the records of the university to show
that this individual had ever been a full-time or
part-time student at the University of
Cincinnati. And here he had reported that he had
gone four years and had graduated And there was a
photostat, a black, white photostat type copy of a
transcript to that effect in his file that she
showed me, that we looked at. And she said, do you
know who this individual is? And I said, no. And it
was George Gordon, last name. I won't even tell you
the last name on tape.
He was a very close relative to Dwight D.
Eisenhower.
And I said, well, that is a problem, isn't it? And I
said, Josephine, why hasn't something been done
about this before? Here it's been in the file, and I
know before that, A lot of these discrepancies had
come to light, and action had been taken, and guys
had been kicked out, or when their discrepancy was
shown to them, they had resigned. They give them
that option. I said, why hasn't something been
done about this? She looked at me, and she said,
your guess is as good as mine. And I said, did my
predecessor know about this discrepancy in this
job? And she said, I think he did.
you wouldn't have said it that way. And I said,
Josephine, how many more major discrepancies do
we have, and before, and I said, before we do
anything about it, I'm gonna make a check myself on
this. I said, how many major discrepancies like
this do we think are still lying in these files and
that we don't know about? She said, Colonel, I
think there's at least 100 or 200 major
discrepancies. Where they just outright lie in
false statements about their integration. When
damn good officers that didn't even apply or that
were turned down began just because they had told
the truth about theirs. And she said, I think
there's at least 200. And I said, I can appreciate
it. Somebody said he had 40 hours and maybe he only
had 32 hours. To me, that's a minor, it's a minor
discrepancy. But to say he graduated When the
registrar said he'd never registered, I said,
that's major. So I said, I'm going to do some
checking on this myself. I called the University
of Cincinnati, talked to the registrar, and told
him who I was. And I said, I'm looking at a
background report by the FBI on, I won't tell you
the name yet, when you turn it off, George Gordon
Moore, married to Dwight D. Eisenhower's wife's
sister, married to Mamie's sister. What rank was
he? Huh? What rank was he? Lieutenant Colonel. He
had been a colonel and demoted. He was an
integrated officer. So I said, this is a pretty hot
potato, and I told him why. He said, my goodness,
that is hot, isn't it? And I said, your university
has said in this FBI background report that he'd
never been a student. I said, would you please
check that again, just to be sure that he's never
was a full-time. Number one, that he was not a
graduate. Number one, he was never a full-time
student, and so forth. And he said, we sure will,
and we'll get back to you. Well, about three or four
days later, The president of the university
called me, Cincinnati University, and said,
we've really done some soul searching on what you
reported to the registrar. And he said, we are
prepared to state, and I will send you a telegram or
a letter, whichever you think is appropriate. We
are prepared to say that so far as we know, he's
never even been a visitor on this campus. He is,
number one, not a graduate. Number two, he's never
been registered, either as full-time or
part-time or evening or continuing education or
anything. Never in any form. We've even checked
the membership records of fraternities during
the time period that he said he was here. We've
checked other dormitory records, and his name
does not appear. And we said, we think if he has a
transcript, it's a fabrication. And I said, would
you just send me a letter and confirm what you've
told me? He said, I'll do that. I'll dictate it when
I hang up. So I took his file and walked upstairs and
showed it to my boss, the major general. I said, we
really got a hot one on our hands here. And he said,
my god, it is, isn't it? And I said, I think there's
some more like it, but there won't any be as big as
this. So he said, well, why don't you make a check
and let's see how many more we've got. Meanwhile,
let me do some talking to some of the guys over in the
staff and over in the G1 and the general staff and
see what we ought to do. And I said, I know what we
ought to do. I ought to confront him and tell him
what's his reply to this, what's his explanation
of it, and tell him he has two alternatives. I'll
take his resignation right now, or he can fight it,
and we can put him before a board to show cause why he
should not be separated. And he said, my God, that
would be tough. And I said, but I know that we've got
to do it. And I said, there's just no ifs, ands, and
buts about it. So. Who was your commanding
general? A fellow named Fellman, Herman Fellman.
And a gutty little guy. And he was mixed up at one
time in the, in the, he was drawn into that Harry
Vaughn. Oh, yeah. The Truman. Sure, the Harry
Vaughn Truman episode. Yeah, yeah.
with Vaughn and so forth. Very courageous little
guy. And I said, well, I'm going to have the people
work through all, go through 9,000 odd files that
we've got here on integrated officers and see how
many major. Well, we did that. And it took about a
week to do that. In the meantime, I'd gotten the
confirmation from the president. We came up with
89 major discrepancy filed, 89. Out of the 89,
there were about 12 that we... 89 out of 9,000?
Yeah. Out of the 89, there were about 12 that we
excused because we believed they were just
oversights or something. And we called, I called
each of those 12 up And I said, is this true or that
true? And then I wrote a memo for the record and put
them in their files and saying, these
discrepancies have been resolved and the matter
is closed. The other 70-odd, we started bringing
them in and telling them, confronting them with
it, and saying, you have this option. You can
resign right now. We'll give you. You can dictate
your resignation to my secretary and we'll
separate you today or tomorrow at Fort Myer and
that's all there is to it. Nothing will happen. If
we take board action and you are removed from the
services, It will be kind of a neuter removal. You
will be without honor and without dishonor. You
will not get any veterans benefits or anything.
And I said, your best way is to resign. Well, out of
the 75, about 69 of them did that. They just
resigned. And one of the guys, one of the 79, While
he was sitting there, he had two
Purple Hearts. He had his ribbons all on. And he had
one other combat decoration that I knew that he
didn't have. Anyway,
I called Josephine in. going to dictate his
resignation. I said, Josephine, I don't think
he's entitled to those decorations. And I said,
make a quick check in this file and call the AG, the
AG's Decorations Office, because they've got all
those awards. This was a, oh Christ,
a DSC, a Distinguished Service Cross. And I said,
call them and see if he was awarded. And I don't
think he ever was. I'm positive he's not. And she
came back in before he even came back in the office.
She came back in about 20 minutes and said, the AG
says, number one, he does not, he's not entitled to
the Purple Heart. And he's not entitled to the DSC.
And he's also the only awards, the only awards
So when he came back in, I saw that he had about four
ribbons that he was wearing that
he was not entitled to. And I just asked him about it
right then and there. I said, you're wearing a
combat award there that most of them that were
awarded were not given to the recipients, but were
given to their spouses or their sons or daughters.
And I said, why in the hell are you wearing that?
Well, the guy started to break down, and he said,
well, I just wanted to look like a big shot. Jeez. So
I said, well, I said, you know, this really, it's a
felony for you to wear this on a military uniform.
And I said, if you weren't resigning, I would
personally prefer charges against you on that.
What do you say to that? Oh, he just didn't have
anything to say. He just started to break down and
everything. But he resigned and we separated him.
We had him separated the next day at Fort Myers
about 2 or 3 o'clock in the afternoon. Well,
anyway, we got down to Gordy after I'd
So he was on duty in Washington, and I called him. I
had known him slightly. And I said, Gordy, would
you come over? I've got a couple of matters I want to
talk to you about. So he came over, and I just went
right to the point. Was the commanding general
there, too? No, no. I confronted him myself. He
told me to go ahead and bring him in. So I did. And I
said, this is a pretty serious matter. And I said,
it's doubly serious because of your relationship
to General Eisenhower. And I said, you don't have
many options that are very pleasant for you under
these circumstances because we verified. But
first I asked him if he had any explanation of it.
And he said, no, I don't have any explanation that I
want to talk about. So when I- Did he admit that he
didn't go there? No, he didn't admit anything,
that he didn't go or anything, or that he did go. So
when I got all through, I said, you can resign right
now, no problem. You'll be a veteran, and you can
resign with honor and everything. And if we kick
you out, it'll be without honor and without
dishonor, if you determine to fight it. He
hesitated a little bit and then he looked me right
in the eye and he says, we will fight it. He used the
expression, we will fight it. And I said, okay,
that's fine if that's your decision. I said, think
about it because tomorrow we'll process the
papers to G1, Department of the Army. The action
won't be taken at this level, it'll be taken at the
Pentagon level of G1. So as soon as he left, I went up
and told the boss. I said, well, the phones are
probably going to be ringing.
But he said, well, I'll tell you. I've talked. He
told me. I knew who the G1 was at that time. Ted
Brooks, General Brooks. He said, I've talked to
Ted Brooks. And Ted said, god damn, bow your neck
and let's purge it. Let's purge ourselves if he's
guilty. So we prepared what case we had and the
evidence we had, and we sent it forward in about
two, three days. They and G1 spent, oh, several
weeks preparing and verifying and getting more
evidence and more statements out of the president
at the university. And even we're going to ask him
to come down and testify at the board hearing.
And...
The board met to make a long story short and about a
month or six weeks after and kicked him out. Kicked
him out, yes sir. Well shortly after that I was
ordered to the Army War College and at Carlisle,
which was an honor to be nominated to go to the War
College. And while I was at the War College I got a
call
very well. And he said, and he had been drinking, I
know, he said,